
<b>Welcome everyone to the “Plenary: Navigating the Complexities of Social Dynamics: Uncovering Insights and Solutions” ISDC 2023</b>

We have a set of great presenters which I have the pleasure to introduce, the first of presenters are:

<b>Mohammad Jalali (‘MJ’)</b> is an assistant professor at Harvard Medical School. Erin Stringfellow is a member of the faculty at Harvard Medical School. They develop system dynamics models for population-based health problems, including the opioid overdose crisis in the U.S. 

<b>Erin Stringfellow</b> joined the Massachusetts General Hospital Institute for Technology Assessment ITA in October 2019. She holds a PhD in Social Work from the Brown School at Washington University in St. Louis and a Master of Social Work from the University of Michigan, where she also earned her BA. She specializes in using qualitative and system dynamics methods to develop sustainable interventions and policies that support recovery from addiction.
Prior to joining the ITA, Dr. Stringfellow was a research scientist and assistant research professor at the Missouri Institute of Mental Health at the University of Missouri, St. Louis, where she worked with a dedicated, passionate team to conduct evaluation and research of federally-funded opioid-related grants. She has held multiple affiliations with the Social System Design Lab since 2013, where she developed skills and expertise in community-based system dynamics projects addressing homelessness, behavioral health policy, and opioid overdoses.

Mohammad Jalali: Dr. Mohammad Jalali (aka, ‘MJ’) is an assistant professor at Harvard Medical School and a research affiliate with MIT Sloan. MJ uses analytics and simulation-based approaches to help policymakers identify and develop high-leverage policies that not only are effective over the long haul, but also are not thwarted by unanticipated side effects. To achieve this goal, he spends a great deal of time working with decision-makers and policymakers, doing fieldwork and collecting different types of data that can inform richer models and analyses. MJ’s work has been featured by various national and international media outlets, including New York Times, Washington Press, Associated Press, The Hill, Newsweek, Scientific American, Business Insider, and NPR.

Reducing Opioid Use Disorder and Overdose Deaths in the United States

Presenters: Mohammad Jalali, Erin Stringfellow

We present a portfolio of our system dynamics projects over the last four years. We have engaged collaboratively with FDA to develop models focused on reducing opioid use disorder (OUD) and fatal opioid overdoses, which killed 80,000 people in the US in the past year. Our first project resulted in SOURCE, a highly quantitative and sophisticated national-level model. This was followed by several cost-effectiveness and empirical data analyses. We are currently working on a conceptual model of treatment for OUD, including interviewing stakeholders and organizing GMB workshops. In another project, we work with CDC to engage communities to learn the factors driving recent rises in overdoses in Massachusetts and South Dakota, where the infrastructure, populations, and drugs of concern differ dramatically. We aim to extend our research and work with local healthcare systems to increase the use of medications to treat OUD. A common theme across all our work is the challenge of staying abreast of a rapidly-changing situation on the ground combined with stigma surrounding OUD, which places barriers at multiple levels, preventing people from taking advantage of various tools that could save their lives. We will discuss an overview of our efforts and challenges, particularly how our approach to engaging government agencies has changed as we have learned the limits of collaborations but also have taken advantage of the opportunity to explore ideas that might not have been funded otherwise.
How Valuable is a COVID-19 Vaccine? Accounting for Health Impacts, Economic Activity, and Endogenous Behavioral Responses across

Presenters: Hazhir Rahmandad, Batman (Evan) Feldman, Babak Heydari, Hyunji Moon

Hazhir Rahmandad is the Schussel Family Professor of Management and Associate Professor of System Dynamics at the MIT Sloan School of Management. Hazhir’s research applies dynamic modeling to problems spanning strategy and healthcare. His organizational work focuses on understanding challenges to learning in dynamic tasks and their implications for strategies adopted by firms. His health research uses modeling to understand various systemic problems from obesity to depression and COVID-19 pandemic. His methodological work contributes to parameter estimation methods for dynamic models and aggregation of prior statistical findings.
The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that vaccines not only reduce infections, hospitalizations, and fatalities but also reduce the need for more disruptive Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions required to keep transmissions under control. Whereas typical assessments of vaccines account for direct benefits on the vaccinated individual, and occasionally the benefits to others due to reduced transmission risk, the indirect benefits through enhancing economic interactions are missing from current estimates. This paper provides the first account of COVID-19 vaccine benefits, both on average and incrementally, by combining direct life and hospitalization savings and indirect benefits due to reduced transmission and enhanced economic activity. The authors use a calibrated model of COVID-19 and GDP trajectories in 50 states of USA from the onset of pandemic until September 2022. They estimate time-varying benefits of COVID-19 vaccines across different states. The overall average vaccination cost savings are $39,298 and the marginal cost savings are $18,117 per vaccination. These comprehensive estimates show the nuanced interplay between economic and health benefits of vaccines, and can inform various applications, e.g. estimating the cost of vaccine mis-information.

The Dynamics of Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Practice Adoption

Presenter: Arya Yadama: B.S. Electrical Engineering and Computer Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis

Arya is a 4th year PhD student in the MIT System Dynamics group. She is interested in the experiences of women and racial minorities at work, the organizational determinants of inequality and the impact of management practices on the economic mobility of low-wage workers.

Adoption of diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) programs has grown exponentially in last several years, even as empirical findings show that these practices have not been particularly effective at increasing the proportion of women and racial minorities in management positions. Several scholars have put forward theories on why DEI practices have not worked as intended, however this literature so far has not applied systems thinking to this knowledge gap. In this paper, I construct a conceptual model of DEI practice adoption using high quality empirical literature and argue that the problem of why DEI is not working, even under the best of intentions, is a dynamic one. Viewing this problem through a feedback lens will set the stage for future research in the area as well as allow practitioners to identify areas of strategic intervention.
1. How might we expect the supreme decision on affirmative action to play into some of these dynamics?
2. Is there a role for systems thinking and stakeholder engagement in dynamic models in DEI practices? 
3. What is the role of organizations in perpetuating inequalities and why do you focus on that level in this work?

